When we think of unity,
the words of Psalm 133:1 may come to mind.
Let’s read them.
Now, the words
aren’t going to be on the screen,
so let’s look them up in the Bible.
I’ll give you a moment.
That’s Psalm 133
and verse 1.
It says: “Look!
“How good and how pleasant it is
for brothers to dwell together in unity!”
Well, we certainly agree
with these words of David.
Now, speaking of David,
he knew the value of unity.
And we may remember
that he didn’t always get
to experience it in his own life.
The beginning and the end
of his reign were marked by civil war
—the very opposite of unity.
But you’d think it would have been easy
for the Israelites to remain united.
After all, they came from the same roots;
they were all children of Abraham;
they spoke a common language—Hebrew;
and they came
from a similar social background.
Their ancestors had all been slaves in Egypt.
So there was no basis
for anybody to brag about his heritage.
Still, the Israelites
found reasons to hate one another.
Israel’s first king was from Benjamin.
Its second king was from Judah.
That was reason enough
to start a war in Israel.
Let’s fast-forward now to the first century.
Unity is so important
that it was on Jesus’ mind
on the night before he died.
You remember that he prayed to his Father
that his disciples ‘might be one
just as he and the Father are one.’
Now, that could have been a challenge.
Why do we say that?
From a human standpoint,
there was no reason
for Jesus’ disciples to be united.
Unlike the Israelites,
they did not have a common ancestor,
they did not have a common mother tongue,
and they came
from a variety of social backgrounds.
Think of it: The first Christians
were Jews or Jewish proselytes.
Growing up, they were taught
that Gentiles were unclean,
and they wouldn’t even
enter the home of a Gentile,
let alone preach to one.
As for Gentile Christians,
they came “from every nation under heaven.”
Most of them knew nothing
of the Hebrew language
or the Hebrew Scriptures.
They’d worshipped false gods.
Some had been highly educated at Athens,
Alexandria, or some other
center of worldly wisdom.
Others had little formal education.
Yet, when they accepted the truth,
Christians became united
and at peace with one another.
The apostle Paul wanted to help them
to safeguard that bond of peace.
Now, that’s the theme
of our discussion this morning.
And we’re going to look at his words
recorded at Ephesians 4:3-6,
and we’re going
to focus in on a particular expression
in these verses.
This is Ephesians chapter 4.
I’ll give you a moment.
Ephesians chapter 4
and we’re going to read verses 3-6.
Now, Paul is interested in unity here,
so let’s see how he frames his discussion.
He says: “Earnestly endeavoring
“[so an effort is involved,
earnestly endeavoring]
“to maintain the oneness of the spirit
“in the uniting bond of peace.
“One body there is, and one spirit,
“just as you were called
to the one hope of your calling;
“[and then he emphasizes]
one Lord, one faith,
“one baptism; one God
and Father of all.”
Now, let’s go back to verse 3
and look at the expression
“the uniting bond of peace.”
So our discussion
is “Safeguard Our ‘Uniting Bond of Peace’!”
Now, the Study Bible
has an interesting note on that expression.
It tells us that the word
translated “uniting bond”
can also be translated “ligament”
—ligament.
And it is translated
“ligament” in other verses.
Now, we know what a ligament is.
It’s a band of strong tissue
that holds our bones together.
So when we talk
about the uniting bond of peace,
we mean that peace is the ligament.
It’s the tissue
that holds God’s people together.
That was true in the first century
and is true today.
Like the early Christians,
we come from different backgrounds;
we speak different languages.
Yet, Jehovah has shown us
how to remain united
and at peace.
Now, let’s explain
what we mean by being united.
To be united doesn’t mean
that we all have to like the same things
or we all have
to think the same on every subject.
There’s room
for a variety of tastes and opinions.
There’s variety on this convention program.
We don’t all wear the same style of suit
or have the same color of tie.
What about you?
What’s your favorite color?
your favorite food?
your favorite pet?
In Jehovah’s organization,
there are dog lovers and cat lovers.
And not everyone
likes the same breed of dog or cat.
Have you ever visited someone
who has a pet
that he thinks is just adorable?
You take one look at the animal,
and you wonder
how anyone could love a face like that.
Yet, he does.
People are different,
and their pets are grateful for that.
The variety we find among God’s people today
will continue on into the new world.
Jehovah loves variety.
How many colors are there?
How many species of plants,
birds, and animals are there?
Among God’s creation,
we find the simple and the complex,
the plain and the fancy,
the sweet and the sour,
the rough and the smooth.
There’s great variety among people.
Even in the new world,
perfect humans won’t have
the same personality,
talents, and abilities.
You’ve always wanted to play the violin?
Don’t think that when you’re perfect,
you’ll just be able
to pick up a violin and play.
And there’s no guarantee
you’ll be able to play in our orchestra.
Now, one way to maintain unity
is to respect the conscience of others.
This is very important
because very often when unity is disturbed,
it’s because we don’t respect
the ability of other brothers and sisters
to decide things for themselves.
Now, what do we mean by the conscience?
Let’s be simple.
It’s the faculty
that helps us determine right from wrong.
I’m going to repeat that.
The conscience is the faculty
to determine right from wrong.
Now, let’s consider
how our upbringing and our culture
can help shape
our personal view of right and wrong.
In some cultures, there are large families.
Conversation around the dinner table is loud.
You can hardly hear yourself think.
The children tease one another
and don’t hesitate
to ask each other personal questions.
The girls borrow each other’s clothes,
sometimes without asking.
Some people would say that’s wrong,
but the girls see nothing wrong with it,
and neither do their parents.
In other cultures, family members
are polite and courteous,
but they don’t talk much
about their plans or their feelings.
The parents don’t often talk about their past
because they value their privacy.
Now, some who were raised that way
tend to be rather strict
with themselves and others.
They have definite views of right and wrong.
Borrow their clothes without asking
and they’ll say: “That’s stealing.
I’m calling the elders.”
There are no gray areas with them.
Now, there are lots of exceptions,
and we’re not saying that everyone
in a certain culture fits the bill.
But you get the idea.
Now, what do you suppose happens
when a publisher from one culture
moves into a congregation
where the other culture predominates?
If he doesn’t adjust
his way of viewing others,
he’ll be miserable.
Is one way right and the other wrong?
No.
Members of both cultures
could learn from one another.
Speaking of culture, we might ask ourselves,
‘How do I feel about brothers and sisters
who come from cultures
that are very different from my own?’
They may speak with an accent.
Their style of dress may be different.
Their manners and food
may not be what we’re used to.
Suppose that an elder
is younger than we are
or from a different race.
Will we accept his counsel?
Will we ask him for counsel?
Or will we look for an elder who’s older
and from a similar background?
Will we celebrate our differences,
or will we allow them to disturb our unity?
So that’s one thing.
But let’s talk about our personal history.
Our personal history
can also affect our view of right and wrong.
Some grew up in a household
where alcohol was a problem.
Home was not a happy place.
And as adults, they stay
as far away from alcohol as they can,
and they take a dim view
of anyone who uses it,
even in moderation.
To them, it’s just plain wrong to drink.
Others have only good memories
of their childhood home.
At supper time,
there was always wine on the table,
but nobody ever abused it.
A person who left behind an immoral lifestyle
might be extremely sensitive
about choices of clothing.
He may be troubled by a clothing style
that other brothers and sisters
find totally acceptable.
If they’re not careful,
those who tend to be strict with themselves
could impose their conscience on others.
Now let’s consider a familiar scenario.
Four publishers
are working rural territory in a car group.
Now, each home is separated from the next
by many miles or kilometers.
At the first call, the driver
and her companion get out
and the other sisters stay in the car.
They have no choice.
There’s no place to go.
Now, the householder has many questions,
and a Bible study has started.
It’s noon when the two publishers
return to the car
—all smiles.
You know what’s coming next, don’t you?
One of the sisters in the back seat says,
“Well, the two of us
can’t count any time this morning.”
What’s she done?
She’s spoken for herself
and for her companion.
And unintentionally, she’s imposed
her own conscience on her friend.
Now, if she doesn’t want
to count any time, that’s her business.
It would be best
if she kept her business to herself.
If you’ve ever visited a foreign country
and gone on a guided tour,
probably one of the things
the tour guide wanted to show you
was the architecture inside a church.
Now, some brothers
have no problem entering a church
if it’s part of a tour because to them
it’s no different from visiting a museum.
Others who were
strong supporters of false religion
couldn’t enter a church for any reason,
not even to attend a wedding or a funeral.
To them, it’s just plain wrong.
Consciences can differ in this respect,
and we have to respect that;
we have to acknowledge that.
And we’re going to expand
on that idea in a moment.
Well, we’ve hardly scratched the surface
when it comes to describing
the variety of personalities
and viewpoints in Jehovah’s organization.
So here’s the question:
How can we maintain our unity?
Remember what Paul said?
“Earnestly endeavoring to maintain”
—maintain this perfect bond of unity.
It means that we have to put forth effort
to maintain that unity.
Well, first of all,
it’ll help a lot to get well-acquainted
with brothers and sisters
who think differently from us.
Get to know their background.
That’ll help you not to overreact
when they take a position
that you don’t agree with.
It’ll help us not to judge them.
Now, Paul wrote very plainly on that subject
in the words found at Romans 14:4
—simple statement but very powerful.
Let’s check it out together
at Romans chapter 14
(I’ll give you a moment)
and verse 4.
Paul writes: “Who are you
“to judge the servant of another?
“To his own master he stands or falls.
“Indeed, he will be made to stand,
for Jehovah can make him stand.”
Now let’s go back
and look at that first sentence again:
“Who are you to judge
the servant of another?”
We know what a judge does.
He declares someone guilty or not guilty.
That’s not our job.
Jehovah is the Judge.
If each of us concentrates
on his own thinking and his own conscience,
the peace and unity
of the congregation will be preserved.
Well, we all want to be balanced
when we determine
what is right and what is wrong.
We want to have a balanced view of things
—a good conscience.
So how can we be balanced
when determining
whether something is right or wrong?
Now, in some cases, it’s easy;
the Bible tells us.
But in other cases, there’s no clear answer.
Let’s consider a scenario
we touched on earlier
—the matter of entering a church.
Now, that may not be
a problem where you live,
but in some places, it’s a real issue.
And remember, these talks
are for our worldwide brotherhood.
So we’re going to consider a subject
that will be a real problem
for many to overcome,
and we hope that they will benefit from it.
So here’s the scenario:
Two different sisters are married
to men who are not in the truth.
Now, in both cases,
the husband’s mother has died.
The funeral will be in a church.
One sister decides to go;
the other decides against it.
The sister who decides to attend
has considered that in that church,
there will just be a talk by a clergyman.
There will be no congregation singing,
congregation prayers, or religious gestures.
She was never very religious anyway,
so none of that would mean anything to her.
And her husband and his family will be happy
if she just sits quietly until it’s over.
Now, the second sister
has a different set of circumstances.
The service in that church
involves participation by the congregation.
She used to be
an active member of that church,
and she’s afraid
she’ll do something she’ll regret.
Her husband’s family
get very emotional at funerals,
and they’re likely to make a scene
if she doesn’t participate.
So she respectfully tells her husband
that her attendance
could cause him embarrassment
and declines to attend.
You can see that each situation is different.
Now we’re going to discuss four questions
that we might ask ourselves
when we’re called upon
to make any difficult decision.
And I will repeat the question
because if you’re taking notes,
you may want to at least
write the question down.
These are very, very good questions
that we can ask ourselves
before we make a difficult decision.
Are you ready?
Here’s number one:
What will make Jehovah happy?
I’ll repeat that.
And that should be our main concern,
to please Jehovah.
Well, how do we know
what will make Jehovah happy?
We identify the Bible principles
that have a bearing on the situation.
One way we can do that
is by checking the Index
or the Research Guide.
What are some Scriptural principles
a sister who’s married to an unbeliever
might consider when deciding
whether to attend a funeral in a church?
Can you think of some?
What about 1 Peter 3:1?
“Wives, be in subjection to your husbands.”
Jehovah is pleased when
a Christian woman respects her husband,
whether he’s in the truth or not.
But a wife’s subjection is relative.
She’s dedicated to Jehovah,
not to her husband.
So that’s 1 Peter 3:1.
What about Isaiah 52:11?
“Touch nothing unclean! . . .
Keep yourselves clean.”
Under the Mosaic Law,
if someone so much as
touched something unclean,
he became unclean.
Many brothers and sisters
would find it very hard to sit quietly
while a clergyman told lies
about the condition of the dead.
To them, it would be
touching something unclean.
Others might compare that
to a young person in school
sitting quietly while his teacher
tells lies about the origin of life.
If someone does decide
to attend a funeral in a church,
he or she should be absolutely determined
not to participate in any religious ritual,
whether singing hymns
or so much as saying “amen”
to a prayer that the clergyman offers.
Remember, the goal is to please Jehovah.
So the first point was,
What makes Jehovah happy?
Number two—number two:
How might my choice affect others?
Have you got that?
How might my choice
affect others?
We would never want to stumble anyone.
Even in a family matter,
such as attending a wedding
or a funeral in a church
(which we may consider as a personal matter),
we need to weigh the effect our decision
could have on others.
It could affect them in one of two ways.
Now, the first is the obvious way.
In some areas, if a Witness
even entered a church,
his brothers and sisters
would lose respect for him.
But there’s a second way
the Witness could stumble someone.
He might be able to attend the funeral
and make no compromise.
But suppose a new brother decided
to follow his example
when a family member died.
The new brother could give in
to family pressure
and participate in idolatry.
How tragic is that!
The apostle Paul never worshipped idols.
So when meat that had been offered to an idol
went up for sale in a meat market,
it probably didn’t bother
Paul’s conscience to buy it
because he knew that an idol is nothing.
But some of his brothers had worshipped
those very idols
before coming into the truth.
They could have felt guilty
about eating that meat.
To them, it would be
like having a communion meal with an idol.
The feelings of his brothers
were important to Paul.
He was willing to sacrifice his own rights
for the sake of his brothers.
We’d never want to take the unloving view
that if our brother
is stumbled by what we do,
it’s too bad for him.
On the other hand,
if we’re the type of person
who is often stumbled by what others do,
we need to ask Jehovah
to help us gain a more balanced viewpoint.
So far, we’ve discussed
the need to make Jehovah happy
and to consider the feelings of our brothers.
What’s next?
Number three: Have I asked for counsel?
You got that?
Have I asked for counsel?
Now, maybe the elders haven’t dealt
with the exact situation we’re facing,
but they know a lot of people.
They may know someone
who has dealt with the situation before
and saw how he handled it.
Or they may know about the effect
the decision had on others.
For example, they might know
how the congregation reacted
the last time someone attended a wedding
or a funeral in a church.
Another situation where brothers often ask
for the help of the elders
involves the use of blood fractions.
Should we accept them or not?
The Governing Body has refused
to impose its conscience on the brotherhood.
But what do we know?
We know that the Bible says
to “abstain . . . from blood.”
But as you divide it into fractions
and the fractions get tinier and tinier,
at what point does blood stop being blood?
Each one will have to decide that
for himself.
Now, some might say,
“Well, if it’s a really,
really tiny fraction,
it doesn’t bother me to take it.”
But others will say:
“It doesn’t matter to me.
If it’s from blood, I don’t want it.”
And their conscience
also has to be respected.
Now let’s illustrate:
Air is made up of nitrogen
and oxygen,
and together they make up 99 percent of air.
That leaves 1 percent.
The 1 percent is made up
of a variety of gases:
carbon dioxide, hydrogen, neon
—small fractions.
When it comes to small fractions,
elders need to be careful, though,
not to insert their personal opinion
into the discussion,
such as by saying
“I wouldn’t take any of it.”
They should simply help the publisher
to reason on the basic principles
and let him make up his own mind.
So where are we?
We make Jehovah happy.
We consider the feelings
of our brothers and sisters.
We ask for counsel.
Number four:
Did I take the time
—did I take the time—
to meditate prayerfully
before making my decision?
Did I take the time to meditate prayerfully
Your goal is to make Jehovah happy.
So you wouldn’t want
to make your decision hastily
and then ask Jehovah to bless it.
We should ask Jehovah for guidance first
rather than asking him to bless a decision
we’ve already made.
Have you ever heard someone say,
“That doesn’t bother my conscience”?
We might ask:
‘How did he come to that conclusion?
‘Did he follow the four steps
we just mentioned?
‘Did he do research to learn
what makes Jehovah happy?
‘Did he think
about how others might be affected?
‘Did he ask for counsel?
‘And did he meditate prayerfully
on his decision?
Or is he just following his feelings?’
Following your feelings isn’t the same
as following a Bible-trained conscience.
I’m going to repeat that.
Following your feelings is not the same
as following a Bible-trained conscience.
Our conscience needs to be trained
in harmony with Scriptural principles.
Now, Paul’s conscience
didn’t bother him a bit
when he was persecuting Christians.
He thought he was doing Jehovah a favor.
But when he realized
how Jehovah felt about it,
he knew he had to change.
We have to be sure that we’re really getting
Jehovah’s thinking on matters.
Remember Jeremiah 17:9
—simple expression but so true.
Jeremiah chapter 17
and verse 9 says:
“The heart is more treacherous
“than anything else and is desperate.
Who can know it?”
‘The heart is treacherous.’
We might allow our emotions
to get the better of us.
For example, when a family member
is disfellowshipped,
if the person is living outside the home,
we know that we should limit our association
to necessary family business.
Now, if the family was never very close,
that might not be a problem.
But suppose family ties are really strong;
that can be a challenge.
If we allow ourselves to be ruled by emotion
rather than by Scriptural principles,
we could stretch the meaning
of necessary family business
to include almost any activity.
The heart is treacherous.
Asking ourselves
the four questions we just mentioned
can help us to make decisions
based on godly principles
rather than simply relying on our feelings.
Now let’s see how mature Christians
can apply these principles
and how the elders can help.
The following video interviews
are about weddings and funerals
—a touchy subject
in many cultures, as you will see.
In Japan,
religious rituals are associated
with each stage of life
and with each season of the year.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we want to keep the cleanliness and unity
of the congregation.
In this regard,
one of the most delicate areas
is the decision on whether to attend
a non-Witness funeral or not.
The first thing we must consider
regarding funerals is not to be involved
in religious rituals and acts of worship
that are condemned by the Bible.
In harmony with the principle
at 2 Corinthians 6:14,
we need to keep completely separate
from pagan acts of worship.
Next, even if we don’t participate
in the worship of other religions,
we need to consider if our decisions
could stumble someone in the congregation.
When we consider the Bible principle
at Luke 17:2,
we do not want our decisions to hinder
the faith of someone in the congregation.
The third point to think about
is our conscience.
We need to seriously think
about the Bible principle
at Galatians 6:5, where it says
that each must “carry his own load.”
This Bible principle
also applies when elders
want to support others.
Of course, those in the congregation
can ask the elders for support
in issues related to funerals.
However, in matters of conscience,
elders cannot force decisions on others.
So it would be wrong
to make some kind of rule
regarding attending non-Witness funerals.
If each person can make
decisions based on Bible principles,
we can have a truly peaceful
and free atmosphere
where each individual’s differing situation
is respected.
This would really contribute
to the unity of the congregation.
And all can maintain a clean conscience
and serve happily before Jehovah.
In my culture,
specifically the Namibian Oshiwambo
culture,
like in many African cultures,
there are many spiritistic customs
related to weddings
that are included in wedding celebrations.
Unfortunately, my family is not in the truth.
So obviously, for Ben and I,
that was one of the main concerns.
They don’t understand our worship of Jehovah,
and they don’t understand
that we apply Bible principles
and not the traditions of men.
We got engaged before the pandemic,
but obviously, now that our wedding
was to be over videoconferencing,
it meant that we didn’t have control
over many things.
We tried to imagine situations
that could stumble our brothers or disrupt
the unity in the congregation.
We had to, in advance,
think of Bible principles
that would apply in our case,
but particularly what we also found helpful
was speaking to a mature elder.
He gave us a principle at Proverbs 14:15.
He told us to be very careful
when people say,
“I will do this” or “I won’t do this”
at your wedding.
Basically, it was up to us to make sure
that the proceedings
or things that happen at our wedding
would be in order and in harmony
with Bible principles.
Another principle that came to mind was
1 Corinthians 10:23.
So obviously, we knew
that we had the right to do many things,
but we were also very conscious
of how our brothers would view our wedding.
We didn’t want anybody to be at our wedding
and feel embarrassed
or even stumbled to be there.
Now looking back at our wedding,
we look back with fond memories.
So applying Bible principles
didn’t restrict our fun.
Also, it contributed to the unity
among our brothers
because all of us
—those present, those who were invited—
were able to enjoy the wedding.
You’re not worried about thinking,
‘Oh, did that thing offend anybody?’
So you’re able to enjoy the day
without any bad memories.
As you can see,
our brothers in many countries
are faced with very difficult decisions
where weddings and funerals are concerned.
The guidance the elders
can provide is invaluable.
Now, sometimes medical doctors
complain that their Witness patients
are inconsistent
because they don’t all have the same view
of certain medical treatments.
One Witness patient
accepts certain fractions or therapies,
so the doctor figures he knows
what Jehovah’s Witnesses believe.
But then the next patient comes along,
and he rejects them all.
The doctor is confused.
Those doctors don’t understand
the role of the conscience.
We shouldn’t worry
when medical professionals
don’t understand our differing viewpoints,
because we should be glad
that we serve a God
who dignifies us
with the freedom to make many
of our own decisions.
Now, the apostle Paul
mentioned four qualities
that will help us to maintain
the uniting bond of peace.
And we’re going to find those qualities
at Ephesians chapter 4,
and we’re going to zero in on verse 2.
Let’s turn to Ephesians chapter 4,
and we’re going to look at verse 2.
Now, we read verses 3-6 earlier,
and you know that Paul
was concerned about unity.
Unity is what he had on his mind,
and now he is telling us
that these four qualities
are going to help us to maintain our unity.
“Earnestly endeavoring”
—remember when he said
“earnestly endeavoring
to maintain the oneness of the spirit”?
It’s the work that we need
to put into promoting unity.
Verse 2 says:
“With all humility and mildness,
“with patience,
putting up with one another in love.”
Isn’t that beautiful?
You notice the qualities:
humility, mildness,
patience, and love?
When we’re humble,
we recognize that our opinion
isn’t always the right one.
Humility will also prevent us
from trying to impose
our conscience on others
as if Jehovah had appointed us to judge them.
What about mildness?
Mildness will help us to think
about the effect our words might have
on our brothers and sisters.
We would never want to hurt them,
even when we strongly disagree with them.
And we should give them
the benefit of the doubt.
If someone says something
that makes you mad,
pray before you speak.
Pray before you speak.
“Love covers a multitude of sins,”
which contributes
to the peace of the congregation.
And we deeply appreciate it
when our brothers are patient with us.
In turn, we need to be patient with them
because we’re all
at different stages of spiritual growth,
and we have to acknowledge that.
Well, we’ve talked
about making Jehovah happy
with our decisions.
We can also please Jehovah
when we work hard
to promote peace in the congregation,
and sometimes it does take
an earnest endeavor.
Sometimes we have to work hard
at ensuring
that the congregation is at peace.
What about the elders?
The elders take the lead
in working together in unity.
They should always speak with a united voice.
If they don’t, their congregation
will sense that they’re divided,
and this will make
the brothers and sisters uneasy.
Any difference of opinion
should be worked out in private,
while showing deep respect for one another.
Just because someone disagrees with us
doesn’t make him a bad person.
We have to understand that,
and his difference of opinion
may search us through.
It may be something
that we need to think about and consider.
And we always consider
that the other person may be right.
What about us publishers?
If we’re having a hard time
getting along with someone,
rather than asking Jehovah to change him,
we should ask Jehovah to mold us,
like the Great Potter he is.
We should ask him to show us
why he drew that person to the congregation.
Remember what Jesus said?
‘No one comes to him
unless the Father draws him.’
What does Jehovah see in that person
that we aren’t seeing?
We each have a responsibility to contribute
to the peace and unity of the congregation.
May Jehovah bless us
as we work toward that goal.